let us take the factorial problem to understand how
Recursion works
So what is the factorial of n the product of
all positive integer less than or equal to n
is the factorial of n Let us take an
example
Let us find the factorial of the number 6 6
factorial will be the product of all positive
integer less than or equal to six
So we will get six into 5
30 in to four 120 Into 3 360 into
2 720 into one 720
So six factorial is equal to 720
So this is how we find the factorial of
a number
So factorial of n is equal to n into
n minus one into n minus two into up to
one
So how can we use recursion here to solve the
factorial problem What will be the recursive call here
See this here every time n is decrementing
By one like n n minus one n minus two
etcetera
So the recursive call a function of n minus one
And here we are finding the product of all those
numbers so multiply n to the result of each recursive
call
Hence the recursive call will be n into
function of n minus one
And what will be the base case We need to
do this process till n becomes one
So we need to stop the recursive call when n
is equal to one
Using this you can solve the problem
So how can you define the recursive factorial
function The function should be called with the integer n
and it will return n factorial which is also
an integer
So we have int factorial of int n the
recursive call is n into function of n minus one
And we should define the base case too which is
n less than or equal to one
So right if n lessthan or equal to one returned
one otherwise return n indo function of n minus
one
Now let us see how the recursive code works
Here we have the main function there
We have two integer variables declared n and ans
Now we need to read the value of n from
the usee supposed three is the number right If
n is not less than zero
We need to find factorial of n so
write if n greater than or equal to zero ans
equal to factorial of n So now the main
function invoked the Recursive function Factorial of three
So the execution of main function will be passed until
the execution of function factorial of three gets completed
one thing to understand here is that the function calls will
be created in the stack and after it gets completed
that particular function will be cleared from the stack
So now the function factorial of three will be
executed Here we have the base condition n less than
or equal to one but here it fails
So return n Into factorial of n minus one
that is three Into factorial of two So this
function factorial of three invokes factorial of two so
the execution of factorial of three is passed until
factorial of two gets executed completely So factorial
of two will be executed Now here first the base
case will be checked but n that is two is
not less than or equal to one So it fails
so
return two into factorial of one
So the function factorial of two invoked factorial of
one
So this functions
Execution is passed until factorial of one is completed
And in factorial of one when the base case
n lessthan or equal to one is checked It is
true
So n that is one is returned and this functions
execution is now completed
Now it is cleared or popped out from the stack
and the below recursive call will start its execution
So now factorial of two will resume its execution
and it will execute this return statement and it will
return two into one that is two
Now this functions task is also over so it will
be popped out from the stack
Now the function factorial of three will continue its
execution and it will evaluate three into two and returned
the result six
So this function is also over so it will be
popped out from the stack and now main function will
resume its execution and the value returned will be stored
In variable ans
So ans equal to six will be printed on
the screen
So this is how every recursive call will be pushed
into the stack until the base case is reached and
once it reaches the base case it will calculate the
result from backwards.